Migration guide 7 (#252)
neo4j/docs-graphql: modules/ROOT/pages/migration/index.adoc

npm update @neo4j/graphql
----

== Breaking changes

Here is a list of all the breaking changes from version 6.0.0 to 7.0.0.

=== Removed the `@unique` directive

> The `@unique` directive is no longer supported. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@unique` directive is no longer supported.
It cannot always be reliably enforced, potentially leading to data inconsistencies that don't match the schema.
```

=== Removed implicit filtering fields

> Implicit equality filtering fields have been removed. You must now use the dedicate input versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implicit equality filtering fields have been removed.
Use the dedicated `eq` field instead:
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(where: { title: "The Matrix" }) {
    title
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(where: { title: { eq: "The Matrix" } }) {
    title
  }
}
----
|===

The `implicitEqualFilters` option of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

=== Required `@node` directive

> The `@node` directive is now required. GraphQL Object types without the `@node` directive will no longer be considered as Neo4j Node representations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@node` directive is now required.
GraphQL object types without the `@node` directive are no longer considered Neo4j node representations.
```

> Queries and Mutations will be generated only for types with the `@node` directive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Queries and mutations are only generated for types with the `@node` directive.
```

=== Removed the `@unique` directive

> The `@unique` directive is no longer supported. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@unique` directive is no longer supported.
It cannot always be reliably enforced, potentially leading to data inconsistencies that don't match the schema.
```

we added the following as an explanation for the prior deprecation in 6.x:

"It cannot always be reliably enforced, potentially leading to data inconsistencies that don't match the schema."

should we repeat this here as well for 7.x?

Reviewer: added the sentence as a suggestion

=== Removed implicit filtering fields

> Implicit equality filtering fields have been removed. You must now use the dedicate input versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implicit equality filtering fields have been removed.
Use the dedicated `eq` field instead:
```

Reviewer 2: dedicated, not dedicate

Reviewer: updated the suggestion

The `@unique` directive is no longer supported:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String! @unique
}

> ----

Reviewer 2: Is the type definition example useful do you think?

Author: Actually not!

=== Removed implicit filtering fields

> Implicit filtering fields have been removed. You must now use the explicit versions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implicit equality filtering fields have been removed. You must now use the explicit versions:
```

Reviewer 2: Or perhaps `equal`

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
  title: String!
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String!
}
----
|===

=== Removed the deprecated `options` argument

The deprecated `options` argument has been removed.

> Consider the following type definitions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the following type definition:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String!
}
----

> The migration is as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following shows the difference for options:
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(options: { first: 10, offset: 10, sort: [{ title: ASC }] }) {
    title
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(first: 10, offset: 10, sort: [{ title: ASC }]) {
    title
  }
}
----
|===

The `deprecatedOptionsArgument` option of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

=== Removed the deprecated `directed` argument

> The deprecated `directed` argument has been removed from queries. This argument previously allowed you to specify whether relationships should be directed or undirected at query time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deprecated `directed` argument has been removed from queries.
This argument previously allowed you to specify whether relationships should be directed or undirected at query time.
```

> Please use the `queryDirection` argument of the `@relationship` directive instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `queryDirection` argument of the `@relationship` directive instead.
```

The `directedArgument` option of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

> === Accepted values of the `queryDirection` argument of `@relationship` has been changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Changed the accepted values of the `queryDirection` argument of `@relationship`
```

Following the removal of the `directed` argument, the `queryDirection` argument of the `@relationship` directive now only accepts two possible values:

- `DIRECTED` (default)
- `UNDIRECTED`

The following values are no longer supported:

 - `DEFAULT_DIRECTED`
 - `DEFAULT_UNDIRECTED`
 - `DIRECTED_ONLY`
 - `UNDIRECTED_ONLY`

> === The deprecated `typename_IN` filter has been removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Removed the deprecated `typename_IN` filter
```

> The deprecated `typename_IN` filter has been removed, please use `typename` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deprecated `typename_IN` filter has been removed.
Use `typename` instead.
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  productions(where: { typename_IN: ["Movie", "Series"] }) {
    title
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  productions(where: { typename: ["Movie", "Series"] }) {
    title
  }
}
----
|===

The `typename_IN` option of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

=== Aggregations are no longer generated for `ID` fields

`ID` fields are excluded from aggregation selection sets and aggregation filters.

> === Single element relationships have been removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Removed single element relationships
```

Single element relationships have been removed in favor of list relationships:

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
    director: Person @relationship(type: "DIRECTED", direction: "IN")
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
    director: [Person!]! @relationship(type: "DIRECTED", direction: "IN")
}
----
|===

> Single element relationships cannot be reliably enforced, leading to data inconsistent with the schema. If the GraphQL model requires 1-1 relationships (such as in federations) these can now be achieved with the `@cypher` directive instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single element relationships cannot be reliably enforced, leading to data inconsistent with the schema.
If the GraphQL model requires one-to-one relationships (such as in federations) these can now be created with the `@cypher` directive instead:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
    director: Person
        @cypher(
            statement: """
            MATCH (this)-[:ACTED_IN]->(p:Person)
            RETURN p
            """
            columnName: "p"
        )
}
----

> === Connect `overwrite` argument has been removed 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Removed the connect `overwrite` argument
```

The `overwrite` argument has been removed in connect operations.

In version 7.0.0, connect operations have been simplified to always create a new relationship between nodes, regardless of whether a relationship already exists.

> If you need to update an existing relationship instead of creating a new one, use the `update` operation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you must update an existing relationship instead of creating a new one, use the `update` operation:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  updateMovies(
    update: {
      actors: [
        {
          where: { node: { name: { eq: "Keanu" } } }
          update: { edge: { role: { set: "Neo" } } }
        }
      ]
    }
  ) {
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----

=== Removed support for `connectOrCreate` operations

The `connectOrCreate` operation has been removed due to limitations on its feature set when compared to other operations.

> === Aggregate fields outside connection fields have been removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Removed aggregate fields outside connection fields
```

> Deprecated aggregate fields have been removed from the schema. Use aggregation fields within the connection selection set instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deprecated aggregate fields have been removed from the schema.
Use aggregation fields within the connection selection set instead.
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
    usersAggregate {
        count
    }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
    usersConnection {
        aggregate {
            count {
                nodes
            }
        }
    }
}
----
|===

The `deprecatedAggregateOperations` option has been removed from the `excludeDeprecatedFields` setting.

=== Subscriptions are now opt-in

Subscriptions are no longer automatically generated for all `@node` types.

> 
> In version 7.x, the `@subscription` directive is required to enable this functionality.
> 
> You must now explicitly enable subscriptions using the `@subscription` directive in one of two ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In version 7.x, the `@subscription` directive is required to enable this functionality.
You must now explicitly enable subscriptions using the `@subscription` directive in one of two ways:
```

- At the schema level to enable subscriptions for all types:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
extend schema @subscription
----

- At the type level to enable subscriptions only for specific types:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node @subscription {
    title: String!
}
----

=== Removed `publish` method from `Neo4jGraphQLSubscriptionsEngine`

The `publish` method has been removed from the `Neo4jGraphQLSubscriptionsEngine` interface as it is no longer used with Change Data Capture (CDC) based subscriptions. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Implementing this method on custom engines will no longer have an effect, and it is no longer possible to call `publish` directly on `Neo4jGraphQLSubscriptionsCDCEngine`.

=== Connect operations now support multiple relationships between the same nodes

> The connect operations have been enhanced to support creating multiple relationships between the same pair of nodes. When performing a connect operation between two nodes, a new relationship will always be created, even if one or more relationships of the same type already exist between those nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connect operations have been enhanced to support creating multiple relationships between the same pair of nodes.
When performing a connect operation between two nodes, a new relationship is always created, even if one or more relationships of the same type already exist between those nodes.
```

> This enables modeling scenarios where multiple distinct relationships of the same type are needed between the same nodes. For example, an actor playing multiple roles in the same movie.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enables modeling scenarios where multiple distinct relationships of the same type are needed between the same nodes.
For example, an actor playing multiple roles in the same movie.
```

=== Changed behavior for multiple relationships between nodes

> The way multiple relationships between the same two nodes are handled has changed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way multiple relationships are handled between the same two nodes has changed:
```

* In entity query fields (like `movies`), duplicate nodes will be removed and only distinct results will be returned, regardless of how many relationships exist between the nodes.

> * In connection query fields (like `moviesConnection`), all relationships will be represented individually. This allows for projecting relationship properties for each connection between the two nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In entity query fields (like `movies`), duplicate nodes are removed and only distinct results are returned, regardless of how many relationships exist between the nodes.
* In connection query fields (like `moviesConnection`), all relationships are represented individually. This allows for projecting relationship properties for each connection between the two nodes.
```

For example, consider a scenario where Eddie Murphy played multiple roles in the same movie:

[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
CREATE (eddie:Person {name: "Eddie Murphy"})
CREATE (nuttyProfessor:Movie { title: "The Nutty Professor" })
CREATE (eddie)-[:ACTED_IN { role: "Professor"}]->(nuttyProfessor)
CREATE (eddie)-[:ACTED_IN { role: "Buddy Love"}]->(nuttyProfessor)
----

With a standard entity query:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  actors(where: {name: {eq: "Eddie Murphy"}}) {
    name 
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----

> The result will show "The Nutty Professor" only once (nodes are deduplicated):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result shows "The Nutty Professor" only once (nodes are deduplicated):
```

[source, json, indent=0]
----
{
  "actors": [
    {
      "name": "Eddie Murphy",
      "movies": [
        {
          "title": "The Nutty Professor"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
----

However, with a connection query:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  actors(where: { name: { eq: "Eddie Murphy" } }) {
    name 
    moviesConnection {
      edges {
        properties {
          role
        }
        node {
          title
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

The result preserves both relationships with their distinct properties:

[source, json, indent=0]
----
{
  "actors": [
    {
      "name": "Eddie Murphy",
      "moviesConnection": {
        "edges": [
          {
            "properties": {
              "role": "Professor"
            },
            "node": {
              "title": "The Nutty Professor"
            }
          },
          {
            "properties": {
              "role": "Buddy Love"
            },
            "node": {
              "title": "The Nutty Professor"
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
----

> === The `@private` directive has been removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Removed the `@private` directive
```

This directive was intended to be used with the library `@neo4j/graphql-ogm` which is no longer supported.

=== Schema generation fails if there are conflicting plural names in types

> For example, the following schema will fail due to ambiguous `Techs` plural:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Schema generation avoids conflicting plural names

Schema generation now detects conflicting plural names in types and fails intentionally.
For example, the following schema will fail due to ambiguous `Techs` plural:
```

Reviewer 2: I think this one needs rethinking. The idea of the feature is that schema generation *intentionally* fails if there are conflicting plurals

Reviewer: updated the suggestion

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Tech @node(plural: "Techs") {
    name: String
}

type Techs @node {
    value: String
}
----

=== Full-text search changes

The `@fulltext` directive has been significantly changed and now requires an index name, a query name and fields to be indexed:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""
Informs @neo4j/graphql that there should be a fulltext index in the database, allowing users to search by the index in the generated schema.
"""
directive @fulltext(
  indexes: [FulltextInput!]!
) on OBJECT

input FulltextInput {
  indexName: String!
  queryName: String!
  fields: [String!]!
}
----

Here is an example of how to use it:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node @fulltext(
  indexes: [
    {
      indexName: "movieTitleIndex"
      queryName: "moviesByTitle"
      fields: ["title"]
    }
  ]
) {
  title: String!
}
----

Full-text search was previously available in two different locations.

> The following form has now been completely removed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following form has been completely removed:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
# No longer supported
{
  movies(fulltext: { movieTitleIndex: { phrase: "The Matrix" } }) {
    title
  }
}
----

> The root-level query has been changed to use the Relay Cursor Connections Specification:

Reviewer: what is the Relay Cursor Connections Specification exactly (warranting the caps)? can we add a link?

Author: I'll add a link, it's this one https://relay.dev/graphql/connections.htm

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesByTitle(phrase: "The Matrix") {
    score
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesByTitle(phrase: "The Matrix") {
    edges {
      score
      node {
        title
      }
    }
    pageInfo {
      hasNextPage
      endCursor
    }
  }
}
----
|===

The new form uses the Relay Cursor Connections Specification, which allows for pagination using cursors and access to the `pageInfo` field.

=== Removed implicit set operations

Implicit set operations in update mutations have been removed and the migration path involves two steps:

[cols="1,1"]
|===

> | Before (Removed) | After (Desired Syntax)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Before (removed) | After (desired syntax)
```

also not sure about "desired" - it is mandatory to use this format, right? maybe "required" or "correct" ?

Author: Was more a leftover, removed :)

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  updateMovies(
    where: { title: { eq: "Matrix" } }, 
    update: { title: "The Matrix" }
  ) {
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  updateMovies(
    where: { title: { eq: "Matrix" } }, 
    update: { title: { set: "The Matrix" } }
  ) {
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----
|===

The `implicitSet` option of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

=== The Neo4j GraphQL Library and @neo4j/introspector now require Node.js 22 or greater

> Version 7.0.0 of the Neo4j GraphQL Library and the @neo4j/introspector now require Node.js version 22 or greater. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Node.js version requirement

Version 7.0.0 of the Neo4j GraphQL Library and @neo4j/introspector now require Node.js version 22 or greater.
```

=== `@coalesce` directive affects projection field values

> In version 7.0.0, the `@coalesce` directive now applies to both filter operations and field projections. Previously, the fallback values specified in the `@coalesce` directive were only used when those fields were used in filters, but not on the returned fields.
> 
> Now, when you select a field annotated with `@coalesce`, null values will be replaced with the specified fallback value in the query result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In version 7.0.0, the `@coalesce` directive now applies to both filter operations and field projections.
Previously, the fallback values specified in the `@coalesce` directive were only used when those fields were used in filters, but not on the returned fields.
Now, when you select a field annotated with `@coalesce`, null values are replaced with the specified fallback value in the query result.
```

Consider this schema:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String!
  rating: Float @coalesce(value: 5.0)
}
----

Previously, requesting a movie with a null rating would return:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    title
    rating  # Would return null if the rating wasn't set
  }
}
----

[source, json, indent=0]
----
{
  "movies": [
    {
      "title": "The Matrix",
      "rating": null
    }
  ]
}
----

> Now, the same query will return the coalesced value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, the same query returns the coalesced value:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
union Production = Movie | Series

type Actor @node {
    name: String!
    actedIn: [Production!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT)
}
----

Previously, when using `single` or `some` filters with unions, conditions inside these filters were evaluated separately for each concrete type in the union, requiring all of them to match.
This behavior was incorrect.

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
    actors(
        where: {
            actedIn: { single: { Movie: { title: { contains: "The Office" } }, Series: { title: { endsWith: "Office" } } } }
        }
    ) {
        name
    }
}
----

The fixed behavior in version 7.0.0:

* `single`: Now correctly returns actors with exactly one related node across the whole union, rather than per type.
* `some`: Now correctly returns actors with at least one matching related node of any type in the union.

This change provides more logical and consistent results, but may affect existing queries that relied on the previous behavior.
This fix applies to both the new filter syntax and the deprecated filters (e.g., `actedIn_SINGLE` and `actedIn_SOME`).

> === List of nullable elements no longer supported

Author: @rsill-neo4j  Can you validate the following points that we  have just have merged?

> List of nullable elements such are no longer supported in types annotated with the `@node` directive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of nullable elements is no longer supported in types annotated with the `@node` directive.
```

The following type definition is no longer supported:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Actor @node {
  name: String
  pseudonyms: [String]!
}

> ----

Reviewer: what is the list of nullable elements in the code listing? the pseudonyms array?
is there something a user could do instead?

Author: Yes, it is the pseudonyms array, the users can make the element in the list non-nullable as:
```graphql
type Actor @node {
  name: String
  pseudonyms: [String!]!
}
```

> This is due the fact that Neo4j does not support storing NULL values as part of a List.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A list of nullable elements is no longer supported in types annotated with the `@node` directive, for example in the following type definition:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Actor @node {
  name: String
  pseudonyms: [String]!
}
----

This is due the fact that Neo4j does not support storing null values as part of a list.
To create a similar but supported type definition, change the value of the `pseudonyms` field to a non-nullable list: `[String!]!`.
```

> === Interfaces and unions cannot be implemented by a mix of `@nodes` and no `@nodes` types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Interfaces and unions disallow mixing types with and without the `@node` directive
```

Author: This could be a little bit misleading, happy to accept it, but I want to be sure that the intention of the change is clear. This change means that you can have types without `@node` implementing an interface/union, and you can have types with the `@node`directive implementing an interface/union, but you can't have an interface/union implemented by some types with the `@node` and some types without it.

Reviewer: updated the suggestion

Interfaces and unions can only be implemented by types that are all annotated with the `@node` directive or none of them.

> The following type definition is no longer supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type definitions like the following are no longer supported because the `Series` type is missing the `@node` directive:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
interface Production @node {
  title: String
}
type Movie @node implements Production {
  title: String
}
type Series implements Production {
  title: String
}
----

> === Relationship fields now require `@node` types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Relationship fields require `@node` types
```

Now, when you select a field annotated with `@coalesce`, null values will be replaced with the specified fallback value in the query result.

Consider this schema:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String!
  rating: Float @coalesce(value: 5.0)
}
----

Previously, requesting a movie with a null rating would return:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies {
    title
    rating  # Would return null if the rating wasn't set
  }
}
----

[source, json, indent=0]
----
{
  "movies": [
    {
      "title": "The Matrix",
      "rating": null
    }
  ]
}
----

Now, the same query will return the coalesced value:

[source, json, indent=0]
----
{
  "movies": [
    {
      "title": "The Matrix",
      "rating": 5.0  # Returns the fallback value specified in @coalesce
    }
  ]
}
----

This ensures consistent behavior between filtering and projecting fields with the `@coalesce` directive.

=== Set `addVersionPrefix` to true by default

> In version 7.0.0, the `addVersionPrefix` option is now set to `true` by default. This means that all generated Cypher queries will automatically be prefixed with the Cypher version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In version 7.0.0, the `addVersionPrefix` option is set to `true` by default.
This means that all generated Cypher queries are automatically prefixed with the Cypher version:
```

[source, cypher, indent=0]
----

CYPHER 5
MATCH(this:Movie)
----

> This ensures that the correct Cypher version is used when queries are executed in Neo4j. However, this change may be incompatible with older versions of Neo4j.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures that the correct Cypher version is used when queries are executed in Neo4j.
However, this change may be incompatible with older versions of Neo4j.
```

> If you need to disable this behavior, you can set `cypherQueryOptions.addVersionPrefix` to `false` in the context:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `cypherQueryOptions.addVersionPrefix` to `false` to disable this behavior:
```

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
{
    cypherQueryOptions: {
        addVersionPrefix: false,
    },
}
----

For example, when using Apollo Server:

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
await startStandaloneServer(server, {
    context: async ({ req }) => ({
        req,
        cypherQueryOptions: {
            addVersionPrefix: false,
        },
    }),
    listen: { port: 4000 },
});
----

> === Changed DateTime and Time value conversion behavior

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Changed `DateTime` and `Time` value conversion behavior
```

> In version 7.0.0, `DateTime` and `Time` values are now converted from strings into temporal types directly in the generated Cypher queries, rather than in server code using the Neo4j driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In version 7.0.0, `DateTime` and `Time` values are converted from Strings to temporal types directly in the generated Cypher queries, rather than in server code using the Neo4j driver.
```

> For example, if you have a date string in your GraphQL query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you have a date String in your GraphQL query:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  movies(where: { releaseDate: { gt: "2023-01-15T12:30:00Z" } }) {
    title
    releaseDate
  }
}
----

The string value "2023-01-15T12:30:00Z" is now converted to a temporal type directly in the Cypher query:

[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
MATCH (this:Movie)
WHERE this.releaseDate > datetime($param0)
RETURN this { .title, .releaseDate } as this
----

=== Mutation operations now follow the relationship direction defined in the `@relationship` argument queryDirection

Mutation operations now respect the `queryDirection` value defined in the `@relationship` directive when matching existing relationships. This ensures consistent behavior between queries and mutations regarding how relationships are traversed.

Important to note:

- When creating new relationships, the physical direction stored in the database is still determined by the `direction` argument.

> - The change affects only how existing relationships are matched during mutation operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Mutation operations follow relationship directions

Mutation operations now respect the `queryDirection` value defined in the `@relationship` directive when matching existing relationships.
This ensures consistent behavior between queries and mutations regarding how relationships are traversed.

[NOTE]
====
 When creating new relationships, the physical direction stored in the database is still determined by the `direction` argument.
The change affects only how existing relationships are matched during mutation operations.
====
```

For example, consider the following schema:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String!
  actors: [Person!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: IN, queryDirection: UNDIRECTED)
}

type Person @node {
  name: String!
  movies: [Movie!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT, queryDirection: UNDIRECTED)
}
----

With `queryDirection: UNDIRECTED`, mutations will now traverse existing relationships in both directions when matching nodes, regardless of the base `direction` value. This is consistent with how queries work with the same directive configuration.

> Previously, mutations would always follow the explicit `direction` value when matching existing relationships, which could lead to inconsistent behavior between queries and mutations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `queryDirection: UNDIRECTED`, mutations now traverse existing relationships in both directions when matching nodes, regardless of the base `direction` value.
This is consistent with how queries work with the same directive configuration.
Previously, mutations would always follow the explicit `direction` value when matching existing relationships, which could lead to inconsistent behavior between queries and mutations.
```

=== Moved `where` field in nested update operations

> The `where` field for nested update operations has been removed, in favour of the `where` inside the nested update input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `where` field for nested update operations has been removed in favor of the `where` inside the nested update input.
```

    update: {
      posts: {
        where: { node: { title: { eq: "Version 7 Release Notes" } } }
        update: { node: { title: { set: "Version 7 Release Announcement" } } }
      }
    }
  ) {
    users {
      name
      posts {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  updateUsers(
    where: { name: { eq: "Darrell" } }
    update: {
      posts: {
        update: {
          where: { node: { title: { eq: "Version 7 Release Notes" } } }
          node: { title: { set: "Version 7 Release Announcement" } }
        }
      }
    }
  ) {
    users {
      name
      posts {
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
----
|===

=== Changed behavior for `single` and `some` filters on relationships to unions

The behavior of `single` and `some` filters when used with relationships to union types has been fixed, which represents a breaking change from the previous incorrect implementation.

Consider this schema with a union type and a relationship to it:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
union Production = Movie | Series

type Actor @node {
    name: String!
    actedIn: [Production!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT)
}
----

> Previously, when using `single` or `some` filters with unions, conditions inside these filters were evaluated separately for each concrete type in the union, requiring all of them to match. This was incorrect behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, when using `single` or `some` filters with unions, conditions inside these filters were evaluated separately for each concrete type in the union, requiring all of them to match.
This behavior was incorrect.
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
    actors(
        where: {
            actedIn: { single: { Movie: { title: { contains: "The Office" } }, Series: { title: { endsWith: "Office" } } } }
        }
    ) {
        name
    }
}
----

The fixed behavior in version 7.0.0:

* `single`: Now correctly returns actors with exactly one related node across the whole union, rather than per type.
* `some`: Now correctly returns actors with at least one matching related node of any type in the union.

This change provides more logical and consistent results, but may affect existing queries that relied on the previous behavior.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This fix applies to both the new filter syntax and the deprecated filters (e.g., `actedIn_SINGLE` and `actedIn_SOME`).

== Deprecations

=== Deprecated mutations operators outside dedicated input

> The following operators:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following operators are now deprecated:
```

- `_SET`
- `_POP`
- `_PUSH`
- `_INCREMENT`
- `_ADD`
- `_DECREMENT`
- `_SUBTRACT`
- `_MULTIPLY`
- `_DIVIDE`

> are now deprecated. You should now use the dedicated input object versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the dedicated input object versions instead:
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  updateMovies(
    where: { title: { eq: "Matrix" } }, 
    update: { title_SET: "The Matrix" }
  ) {
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  updateMovies(
    where: { title: { eq: "Matrix" } }, 
    update: { title: { set: "The Matrix" }  }
  ) {
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----
|===

The `excludeDeprecatedFields` option now contains the option `mutationOperations` to remove these deprecated operators:

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
const neoSchema = new Neo4jGraphQL({
  typeDefs,
  excludeDeprecatedFields: {
    mutationOperations: true
  }
});
----

=== Deprecated the _EQ filter syntax

> The `_EQ` filter syntax is now deprecated. You should now use the dedicated input object versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `_EQ` filter syntax is now deprecated.
Use the dedicated input object versions instead:
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(where: { title_EQ: "The Matrix" }) {
    title
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(where: { title: { eq: "The Matrix" } }) {
    title
  }
}
----
|===

The `excludeDeprecatedFields` option now contains the option `attributeFilters` to remove these deprecated filters:

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
const neoSchema = new Neo4jGraphQL({
  typeDefs,
  excludeDeprecatedFields: {
    attributeFilters: true
  }
});
----

=== Deprecated aggregation filters outside connection fields

> The aggregation filters outside connection fields are now deprecated. You should use the aggregation filters within connection input fields instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aggregation filters outside connection fields are now deprecated.
Use the aggregation filters within connection input fields instead:
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
    posts(where: { likesAggregate: { node: { someInt: { average: { eq: 10 } } } } }) {
        content
    }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
    posts(where: { likesConnection: { aggregate: { node: { someInt: { average: { eq: 10 } } } } } }) {
        content
    }
}
----
|===

The `excludeDeprecatedFields` option now contains the option `aggregationFiltersOutsideConnection` to remove these deprecated filters:

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
const neoSchema = new Neo4jGraphQL({
  typeDefs,
  excludeDeprecatedFields: {
    aggregationFiltersOutsideConnection: true
  }
});
----

> === Deprecated Aggregation filters outside dedicated input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Deprecated aggregation filters outside dedicated input
```

> Aggregation filters outside dedicated input like `_AVERAGE_GT` are now deprecated. You should use the dedicated input object versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregation filters outside dedicated input like `_AVERAGE_GT` are now deprecated.
Use the dedicated input object versions instead:
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query Movies {
  movies(
    where: { actorsAggregate: { node: { lastRating_AVERAGE_GT: 6 } } }
  ) {
    title
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query Movies {
  movies(
    where: {
      actorsAggregate: { node: { lastRating: { average: { gt: 6 } } } }
    }
  ) {
    title
  }
}
----
|===

The `excludeDeprecatedFields` option now contains the option `aggregationFilters` to remove these deprecated filters:

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
const neoSchema = new Neo4jGraphQL({
  typeDefs,
  excludeDeprecatedFields: {
    aggregationFilters: true
  }
});
----

=== Deprecated relationship filters outside dedicated input

> The relationship filtering syntax outside dedicated input like `_SOME`, `_ALL`, and `_NONE` is now deprecated. You should use the dedicated input object versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The relationship filtering syntax outside dedicated input like `_SOME`, `_ALL`, and `_NONE` is now deprecated.
Use the dedicated input object versions instead:
```

            count {
                nodes
            }
        }
    }
}
----
|===

The `deprecatedAggregateOperations` option has been removed from the `excludeDeprecatedFields` setting.

=== Subscriptions are now opt-in

Subscriptions are no longer automatically generated for all `@node` types.

In version 7.x, the `@subscription` directive is required to enable this functionality.

You must now explicitly enable subscriptions using the `@subscription` directive in one of two ways:

- At the schema level to enable subscriptions for all types:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
extend schema @subscription
----

- At the type level to enable subscriptions only for specific types:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node @subscription {
    title: String!
}
----

=== Removed `publish` method from `Neo4jGraphQLSubscriptionsEngine`

The `publish` method has been removed from the `Neo4jGraphQLSubscriptionsEngine` interface as it is no longer used with Change Data Capture (CDC) based subscriptions. 

Implementing this method on custom engines will no longer have an effect, and it is no longer possible to call `publish` directly on `Neo4jGraphQLSubscriptionsCDCEngine`.

> === Connect operations now support multiple relationships between the same nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[connect-operation-details]]
=== Connect operations now support multiple relationships between the same nodes
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
  title: String!
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String!
}
----
|===

=== Removed the deprecated `options` argument

The deprecated `options` argument has been removed.

Consider the following type definitions:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
  title: String!
}
----

The migration is as below:

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(options: { first: 10, offset: 10, sort: [{ title: ASC }] }) {
    title
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  movies(first: 10, offset: 10, sort: [{ title: ASC }]) {
    title
  }
}
----
|===

> The `deprecatedOptionsArgument` of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `deprecatedOptionsArgument` option of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.
```

=== Removed the deprecated `directed` argument

The deprecated `directed` argument has been removed from queries. This argument previously allowed you to specify whether relationships should be directed or undirected at query time.

Please use the `queryDirection` argument of the `@relationship` directive instead.

> The `directedArgument` setting of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `directedArgument` option of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.
```

No strong opinion on whether or not we use "option", or "setting" or "key", but we should be consistent with whatever we decide on.

=== Accepted values of the `queryDirection` argument of `@relationship` has been changed

> Following the removal of the `directed` argument,
> the `queryDirection` argument of the `@relationship` directive now only accepts two possible values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the removal of the `directed` argument, the `queryDirection` argument of the `@relationship` directive now only accepts two possible values:
```

- `DIRECTED` (default)
- `UNDIRECTED`

The following values are no longer supported:

 - `DEFAULT_DIRECTED`
 - `DEFAULT_UNDIRECTED`
 - `DIRECTED_ONLY`
 - `UNDIRECTED_ONLY`

=== The deprecated `typename_IN` filter has been removed

The deprecated `typename_IN` filter has been removed, please use `typename` instead.

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  productions(where: { typename_IN: ["Movie", "Series"] }) {
    title
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  productions(where: { typename: ["Movie", "Series"] }) {
    title
  }
}
----
|===

The `typename_IN` setting of `excludeDeprecatedFields` has been removed.

=== Aggregations are no longer generated for `ID` fields

> `ID` fields are excluded from aggregation fields and aggregation filters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ID` fields are excluded from aggregation selection sets and aggregation filters.
```

https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Fields

Author: To be fair, I believe it is more precise fields as terminology as the definition of  `Selection`  contains:
- Field
- FragmentSpread
- InlineFragment

But in our case, we don't generate any of the other two. Doesn't matter anyway!

=== Single element relationships have been removed

Single element relationships have been removed in favor of list relationships:

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
    director: Person @relationship(type: "DIRECTED", direction: "IN")
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
    director: [Person!]! @relationship(type: "DIRECTED", direction: "IN")
}
----
|===

> Single element relationships cannot be reliably enforced, leading to a data inconsistent with the schema. If the GraphQL model requires 1-1 relationships (such as in federations) these can now be achieved with the `@cypher` directive instead:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Single element relationships cannot be reliably enforced, leading to data inconsistent with the schema. If the GraphQL model requires 1-1 relationships (such as in federations) these can now be achieved with the `@cypher` directive instead:
```

Or possibly "a dataset"

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
    director: Person
        @cypher(
            statement: """

>             MATCH(this)-[:ACTED_IN]->(p:Person)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            MATCH (this)-[:ACTED_IN]->(p:Person)
```

            RETURN p
            """
            columnName: "p"
        )
}
----

=== Connect `overwrite` argument has been removed 

The `overwrite` argument has been removed in connect operations.

> In version 7.0.0, connect operations have been simplified to always create a new relationship between nodes, regardless of whether a relationship already exists.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can link the part later in the document which covers this point in more detail?

Reviewer: > Maybe we can link the part later in the document which covers this point in more detail?

```suggestion
In version 7.0.0, connect operations have been simplified to always create a new relationship between nodes, regardless of whether a relationship already exists.
See xref:#connect-operation-details[].
```

If you need to update an existing relationship instead of creating a new one, use the `update` operation:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  updateMovies(
    update: {
      actors: [
        {
          where: { node: { name: { eq: "Keanu" } } }
          update: { edge: { role: { set: "Neo" } } }
        }
      ]
    }
  ) {
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----

=== Removed support for `connectOrCreate` operations

The `connectOrCreate` operation has been removed due to limitations on its feature set when compared to other operations.

=== Aggregate fields outside connection fields have been removed

> Deprecated aggregate fields have been removed from the schema. Use aggregation fields within the connection fields instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deprecated aggregate fields have been removed from the schema. Use aggregation fields within the connection selection set instead.
```

https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Fields

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
    usersAggregate {
        count
    }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
    usersConnection {
        aggregate {
            count {
                nodes
            }
        }
    }
}
----
|===

> The option `deprecatedAggregateOperations` has been removed from the `excludeDeprecatedFields` setting.

Reviewer 2: Just pointing this one out as another place it has been written inconsistently.

=== Subscriptions are now opt-in

> Subscriptions were automatically generated for all `@node` types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Subscriptions are no longer automatically generated for all `@node` types.
```

}
----

Here is an example of how to use it:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node @fulltext(
  indexes: [
    {
      indexName: "movieTitleIndex"
      queryName: "moviesByTitle"
      fields: ["title"]
    }
  ]
) {
  title: String!
}
----

Full-text search was previously available in two different locations.

The following form has now been completely removed:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
# No longer supported
{
  movies(fulltext: { movieTitleIndex: { phrase: "The Matrix" } }) {
    title
  }
}
----

The root-level query has been changed to use the Relay Cursor Connections Specification:

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Before | After

a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesByTitle(phrase: "The Matrix") {
    score
    movies {
      title
    }
  }
}
----
a|
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  moviesByTitle(phrase: "The Matrix") {
    edges {
      score
      node {
        title
      }
    }
    pageInfo {
      hasNextPage
      endCursor
    }
  }
}
----
|===

The new form uses the Relay Cursor Connections Specification, which allows for pagination using cursors and access to the `pageInfo` field.

=== Removed implicit set operation

> Implicit set operation in update mutations have been removed and the migration path involves two steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implicit set operations in update mutations have been removed and the migration path involves two steps:
```

----
|===

> Single element relationships cannot be reliably enforced, leading to data inconsistent with the schema. If the GraphQL model requires 1-1 relationships (such as in federations) these can now be achieved with the `@cypher` directive instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single element relationships cannot be reliably enforced, leading to data inconsistent with the schema.
If the GraphQL model requires one-to-one relationships (such as in federations) you can now create them with the `@cypher` directive instead:
```

Reviewer 2: The use of the word achieve is incorrect here.

Instead let's rephrase it with something like "implement" or "create".

Reviewer: updated the suggestion
